---
title: 20180207
date: 2018-02-07 23:18:34
tags:
---

最近在看一本很有意思的书，佛陀的大脑（Buddha's Brain)，还有最后一章没读。这本书挺有意思，从科学出发给出了一个新的视角。当然我不认为科学可以完全解释人的情感。

人为什么谈恋爱，最近被问了这个问题。有一种说法是造物主的最终目的是为了最大化宇宙的熵，所以需要人繁殖后代，这是宏观目标啦，从微观看谈恋爱对个体的意义，摘几段书：

Romantic love is found in almost all human cultures, suggesting that it’s deep in our biological—even our biochemical—nature (Jankowiak and Fischer 1992). Although endorphins and vasopressin are involved in the neurochemistry of bonding and love, the major player is probably oxytocin (Young and Wang 2004). This neuromodulator (and hormone) creates feelings of caring and cherishing; it’s present in both females and males, though much more so in women. Oxytocin encourages eye-to-eye contact (Guastella, Mitchell, and Dads 2008); increases trust (Kosfeld et al. 2005); dampens amygdala arousal and promotes approach-type behaviors (Petrovic et al. 2008); and supports tend-and-befriend behaviors in women when they’re stressed (Taylor et al. 2000).

Distinct neural networks handle infatuation and long-term attachment (Fisher, Aron, and Brown 2006). In its early stages, it’s natural for a romantic relationship to be dominated by intense, often volatile rewards that draw heavily on dopamine-based neural networks (Aron et al. 2005). Later, the relationship shifts gradually toward more diffuse and stable fulfillments that rely on oxytocin and related systems. Still, in long-term couples who continue to feel deeply in love, ongoing tickles of dopamine keep stimulating the pleasure centers of each partner’s brain (Schechner 2008).

---------

When you hold something in mind, such as a presentation at work or the sensations of breathing, the cortical regions that support working memory (a key component of the mental chalkboard) are relatively stable. To keep them this way, a kind of gate protects working memory from all of the other information coursing through the brain. When the gate is closed, you stay focused on one thing. When a new stimulus comes knocking—perhaps a startling thought, or the sound of a bird—the gate pops open, allowing new information in to update working memory. Then the gate closes behind it, keeping out other information. (Of course, it’s actually more complicated than this; see Buschman and Miller 2007; Dehaene, Sergent, and Changeux 2003.)

As long as the contents of working memory are moderately stimulating, a steady stream of dopamine is produced, which keeps the gate closed. If the stimulation decreases significantly, the pulsing of dopamine-releasing neurons slows down, allowing the gate to open and new information to surge in. On the other hand, a spike in the rate of dopamine release—due to new opportunities or threats—will open the gate as well (Braver, Barch, and Cohen 2002.）

----------

Now let’s explore the next two factors of absorption: rapture and joy. Positive feelings like these help concentrate attention by causing steadily high transmissions of dopamine to the neural substrate of working memory. As we saw in the previous chapter, the gate to working memory—and thus to the field of awareness—pops open both when dopamine slumps and when it spikes. Steadily high dopamine—like from positive feelings—prevents slumps. Further, when dopamine-releasing neurons are already near their peak firing rate, it’s hard to get a spike—they’re near their ceiling and can’t get much higher. Thus, the more enjoyable and intense your feelings are, the greater the dopamine release—and the more concentrated your attention.

In other words, whether you are going deep into meditative contemplation or just trying to keep your eyes open in an afternoon meeting, happiness can really help. Personally, I have found the intensification of positive emotions during meditation to be a wonderful practice: it feels great, it increases concentration, and it nourishes a strong feeling of well-being throughout the day.

----------

**所以谈恋爱是为了好好学习2333**

我感觉我也是挺能扯的。就我读到这边的理解，那些正面的东西，一个人通过冥想改造大脑也是可以获得的，相比于指望另一半，这种方式更加可靠。当然有真爱的话，不言自明，是更好的。
